federalist 63
the senate continued for the independent
journal
hamilton or madison
to the people of the state of new york
a fifth disidiratum illustrating the
utility of a senate is the want of a due
sense of national character
without a select and stable member of
the government the esteem of foreign
powers will not only be forfeited by an
unenlightened and variable policy
proceeding from the causes already
mentioned but the national councils will
not possess that sensibility to the
opinion of the world which is perhaps
not less necessary in order to merit
than it is to obtain its respect and
confidence
an attention to the judgment of other
nations is important to every government
for two reasons
the one is that independently of the
merits of any particular plan or measure
it is desirable on various accounts that
it should appear to other nations as the
offspring of a wise and honorable policy
the second is that in doubtful cases
particularly where the national councils
may be warped by some strong passion or
momentary interest the presumed or known
opinion of the impartial world may be
the best guide that can be followed
what has not america lost by her want of
character with foreign nations and how
many errors and follies would she not
have avoided if the justice and
propriety of her measures had in every
instance been previously tried by the
light in which they would probably
appear to the unbiased part of mankind
yet however requisite a sense of
national character may be it is evident
that it can never be sufficiently
possessed by a numerous and changeable
body
it can only be found in a number so
small that a sensible degree of the
praise and blame of public measures may
be the portion of each individual or in
an assembly so durably invested with
public trust that the pride and
consequence of its members may be
sensibly incorporated with the
reputation and prosperity of the
community
the half-yearly representatives of rhode
island would probably have been little
affected in their deliberations on the
iniquitous measures of that state by
arguments drawn from the light in which
such measures would be viewed by foreign
nations or even by the sister states
whilst it can scarcely be doubted that
if the concurrence of a select and
stable body had been necessary a regard
to national character alone would have
prevented the calamities under which
that misguided people is now laboring
i add as a sixth defect the want in some
important cases of a due responsibility
in the government to the people arising
from that frequency of elections which
in other cases produces this
responsibility
this remark will perhaps appear not only
new but paradoxical it must nevertheless
be acknowledged when explained to be as
undeniable as it is important
responsibility in order to be reasonable
must be limited to objects within the
power of the responsible party and in
order to be effectual must relate to
operations of that power of which a
ready and proper judgment can be formed
by the constituents
the objects of government may be divided
into two general classes the one
depending on measures which have singly
and immediate and sensible operation the
other depending on a succession of
well-chosen and well-connected measures
which have a gradual and perhaps
unobserved operation
the importance of the latter description
to the collective and permanent welfare
of every country needs no explanation
and yet it is evident that an assembly
elected for so short a term is to be
unable to provide more than one or two
links in a chain of measures on which
the general welfare may essentially
depend ought not to be answerable for
the final result any more than a steward
or tenant engaged for one year could be
justly made to answer for places or
improvements which could not be
accomplished in less than half a dozen
years
nor is it possible for the people to
estimate the share of influence which
their annual assemblies may respectively
have on events resulting from the mixed
transactions of several years
it is sufficiently difficult to preserve
a personal responsibility in the members
of a numerous body for such acts of the
body as have an immediate detached and
palpable operation on its constituents
the proper remedy for this defect must
be an additional body in the legislative
department which having sufficient
permanency to provide for such objects
as require a continued attention and a
train of measures may be justly and
effectually answerable for the
attainment of those objects
thus far i have considered the
circumstances which point out the
necessity of a well-constructed senate
only as they relate to the
representatives of the people
to a people as little blinded by
prejudice or corrupted by flattery as
those whom i address i shall not scruple
to add that such an institution may be
sometimes necessary as a defense to the
people against their own temporary
errors and delusions
as the cool and deliberate sense of the
community ought in all governments and
actually will in all free governments
ultimately prevail over the views of its
rulers so there are particular moments
in public affairs when the people
stimulated by some irregular passion or
some illicit advantage or misled by the
artful misrepresentations of interested
men may call for measures which they
themselves will afterwards be the most
ready to lament and condemn
in these critical moments how salutary
will be the interference of some
temperate and respectable body of
citizens in order to check the misguided
career and to suspend the blow meditated
by the people against themselves until
reason justice and truth can regain
their authority over the public mind
what bitter anguish would not the people
of athens have often escaped if their
government had contained so provident a
safeguard against the tyranny of their
own passions
popular liberty might then have escaped
the indelible reproach of decreeing to
the same citizens the hemlock on one day
and statues on the next
it may be suggested that a people spread
over an extensive region cannot like the
crowded inhabitants of a small district
be subject to the infection of violent
passions or to the danger of combining
in pursuit of unjust measures
i am far from denying that this is a
distinction of peculiar importance
i have on the contrary endeavored in a
former paper to show that it is one of
the principal recommendations of a
confederated republic
at the same time this advantage ought
not to be considered as superseding the
use of auxiliary precautions
it may even be remarked that the same
extended situation which will exempt the
people of america from some of the
dangers incident to lesser republics
will expose them to the inconveniency of
remaining for a longer time under the
influence of those misrepresentations
which the combined industry of
interested men may succeed in
distributing among them
it adds no small weight to all these
considerations to recollect that history
informs us of no long-lived republic
which had not a senate sparta rome and
carthage are in fact the only states to
whom that character can be applied
in each of the first two there was a
senate for life the constitution of the
senate in the last is less known
circumstantial evidence makes it
probable that it was not different in
this particular from the two others
it is at least certain that it had some
quality or other which rendered it an
anchor against popular fluctuations and
that a smaller council drawn out of the
senate was appointed not only for life
but filled up vacancies itself
these examples though as unfit for the
imitation as they are repugnant to the
genius of america are notwithstanding
when compared with the fugitive and
turbulent existence of other ancient
republics very instructive proofs of the
necessity of some institution that will
blend stability with liberty
i'm not unaware of the circumstances
which distinguish the american from
other popular governments as well
ancient as modern and which render
extreme circumspection necessary in
reasoning from the one case to the other
but after allowing do weight to this
consideration it may still be maintained
that there are many points of similitude
which render these examples not unworthy
of our attention
many of the defects as we have seen
which can only be supplied by a
senatorial institution are common to a
numerous assembly frequently elected by
the people and to the people themselves
there are others peculiar to the former
which require the control of such an
institution
the people can never willfully betray
their own interests but they may
possibly be betrayed by the
representatives of the people and the
danger will be evidently greater where
the whole legislative trust is lodged in
the hands of one body of men than where
their concurrence of separate and
dissimilar bodies is required in every
public act
the difference most relied on between
the american and other republics
consists in the principle of
representation which is the pivot on
which the former move and which is
supposed to have been unknown to the
latter or at least to the ancient part
of them the use which has been made of
this difference in reasonings contained
in former papers will have shown that i
am disposed neither to deny its
existence nor to undervalue its
importance
i feel the less restraint therefore in
observing that the position concerning
the ancient governments on the subject
of representation is by no means
precisely true in the latitude commonly
given to it
without entering into a disquisition
which here would be misplaced i will
refer to a few known facts in support of
what i advance
in the most pure democracies of greece
many of the executive functions were
performed not by the people themselves
but by officers elected by the people
and representing the people in their
executive capacity
prior to the reform of solon athens was
governed by nine archons annually
elected by the people at large
the degree of power delegated to them
seems to be left in great obscurity
subsequent to that period we find an
assembly first of four and afterwards of
600 members annually elected by the
people and partially representing them
in their legislative capacity since they
were not only associated with the people
in the function of making laws but had
the exclusive right of originating
legislative propositions to the people
the senate of carthage also whatever
might be its power or the duration of
its appointment appears to have been
elective by the suffrages of the people
similar instances might be traced in
most if not all the popular governments
of antiquity
lastly in sparta we meet with the aphori
and in rome with the tribunes two bodies
small indeed in numbers but annually
elected by the whole body of the people
and considered as the representatives of
the people almost in their
plenipotentiary capacity the kosmi of
crete were also annually elected by the
people and have been considered by some
authors as an institution analogous to
those of sparta and rome with this
difference only that in the election of
that representative body the right of
suffrage was communicated to a part only
of the people
from these facts to which many others
might be added it is clear that the
principle of representation was neither
unknown to the ancients nor wholly
overlooked in their political
constitutions the true distinction
between these and the american
governments lies in the total exclusion
of the people in their collective
capacity from any share in the latter
and not in the total exclusion of the
representatives of the people from the
administration of the former the
distinction however thus qualified must
be admitted to leave a most advantageous
superiority in favor of the united
states
but to ensure to this advantage its full
effect we must be careful not to
separate it from the other advantage of
an extensive territory for it cannot be
believed that any form of representative
government could have succeeded within
the narrow limits occupied by the
democracies of greece
in answer to all these arguments
suggested by reason illustrated by
examples and enforced by our own
experience the jealous adversary of the
constitution will probably contend
himself with repeating that a senate
appointed not immediately by the people
and for the term of six years must
gradually acquire a dangerous
preeminence in the government and
finally transform it into a tyrannical
aristocracy
to this general answer the general reply
ought to be sufficient that liberty may
be endangered by the abuses of liberty
as well as by the abuses of power that
there are numerous instances of the
former as well as of the latter and that
the former rather than the latter are
apparently most to be apprehended by the
united states but a more particular
reply may be given
before such a revolution can be affected
the senate it is to be observed must in
the first place corrupt itself must next
corrupt the state legislatures must then
corrupt the house of representatives and
must finally corrupt the people at large
it is evident that the senate must be
first corrupted before it can attempt an
establishment of tyranny without
corrupting the state legislatures it
cannot prosecute the attempt because the
periodical change of members would
otherwise regenerate the whole body
without exerting the means of corruption
with equal success on the house of
representatives the opposition of that
co-equal branch of the government would
inevitably defeat the attempt and
without corrupting the people themselves
the succession of new representatives
would speedily restore all things to
their pristine order
is there any man who can seriously
persuade himself that the proposed
senate can by any means possible within
the compass of human address arrive at
the object of a lawless ambition through
all these obstructions
if reason condemns the suspicion the
same sentence is pronounced by
experience
the constitution of maryland furnishes
the most opposite example the senate of
that state is elected as the federal
senate will be indirectly by the people
and for a term less by one year only
than the federal senate it is
distinguished also by the remarkable
prerogative of filling up its own
vacancies within the term of its
appointment and at the same time is not
under the control of any such rotation
as is provided for the federal senate
there are some other lesser distinctions
which would expose the former to
colorable objections that do not lie
against the latter
if the federal senate therefore really
contained the danger which has been so
loudly proclaimed some symptoms at least
of a light danger ought by this time to
have been betrayed by the senate of
maryland but no such symptoms have
appeared on the contrary the jealousies
at first entertained by men of the same
description with those who view with
terror the correspondent part of the
federal constitution have been gradually
extinguished by the progress of the
experiment and the maryland constitution
is daily deriving from the salutary
operation of this part of it a
reputation in which it will probably not
be rivaled by that of any state in the
union
but if anything could silence the
jealousies on this subject it ought to
be the british example
the senate there instead of being
elected for a term of six years and of
being unconfined to particular families
or fortunes is in hereditary assembly of
opulent nobles the house of
representatives instead of being elected
for two years and by the whole body of
the people is elected for seven years
and in very great proportion by a very
small proportion of the people here
unquestionably ought to be seen in full
display the aristocratic usurpations and
tyranny which are at some future period
to be exemplified in the united states
unfortunately however for the
anti-federal argument the british
history informs us that this hereditary
assembly has not been able to defend
itself against the continual
encroachments of the house of
representatives and that it no sooner
lost the support of the monarch then it
was actually crushed by the weight of
the popular branch
as far as antiquity can instruct us on
this subject its examples support the
reasoning which we have employed in
sparta the afore the annual
representatives of the people were found
an overmatch for the senate for life
continually gained on its authority and
finally drew all power into their own
hands the tribunes of rome who were the
representatives of the people prevailed
it is well known in almost every contest
with the senate for life and in the end
gained the most complete triumph over it
the fact is the more remarkable as
unanimity was required in every act of
the tribunes even after their number was
augmented to ten
it proves the irresistible force
possessed by that branch of a free
government which has the people on its
side
to these examples might be added that of
carthage whose senate according to the
testimony of polybius instead of drawing
all power into its vortex had at the
commencement of the second punic war
lost almost the whole of its original
portion
besides the conclusive evidence
resulting from the assemblage of facts
that the federal senate will never be
able to transform itself by gradual use
or patience into an independent and
aristocratic body we are warranted in
believing that if such a revolution
should ever happen from causes which the
foresight of men cannot guard against
the house of representatives with the
people on their side will at all times
be able to bring back the constitution
to its primitive form and principles
against the force of the immediate
representatives of the people nothing
will be able to maintain even the
constitutional authority of the senate
but such a display of enlightened policy
and attachment to the public good as
will divide with that branch of the
legislature the affections and support
of the entire body of the people
themselves
publius